# What Are Java Streams? 

A Stream in Java is a **pipeline** that helps you process data (like lists, arrays, sets, etc.) in a clean, readable, and functional style.

Think of a stream like **water flowing through pipes**:

The **source** is the bucket of water (your list or array)

The **intermediate operations** are filters or mixers (steps that transform the data)

The **terminal operation** is the end where you drink or store the output (final result)

👉 Streams DO NOT store data. They operate on existing collections.

👉 Streams DO NOT modify the original collection.

👉 Streams process elements one by one through the pipeline.

## Why Streams?

✔ More readable

✔ Less code

✔ Encourages functional programming

✔ Easy parallel processing

✔ Helps avoid loops, temporary lists

## Types of Stream Operations

**Source** → Collection, Array, I/O channels

**Intermediate operations:** Return another stream (e.g., map, filter, sorted).

**Terminal operations:** Produce a result  (e.g., collect, forEach, reduce).

**Short-circuiting operations:** Stop processing early (e.g., findFirst, anyMatch).

## Important Intermediate Operations

1. filter()

Keeps only elements that match a condition
✔ Useful for search, validation

2. map()

Transforms each element
✔ Useful for converting objects, extracting fields

3. sorted()

Sort the elements
✔ By natural order or custom comparator

4. distinct()

Removes duplicates

5. limit(n)

Takes first n elements

6. skip(n)

Skips first n elements

##  Terminal Operations

1. collect()

Convert back to list, set, map, etc.

2. forEach()

Perform action for each item

3. reduce()

Combine all items into one (sum, max, etc.)

4. count()

Returns the number of elements

## short-circuiting

Operations like **findFirst(), anyMatch(), allMatch(),isPresent()** 

stop processing once the answer is found


## Without Streams:

```
List<Integer> numbers = List.of(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);
List<Integer> evenNumbers = new ArrayList<>();

for (Integer n : numbers) {
    if (n % 2 == 0) {
        evenNumbers.add(n);
    }
}

System.out.println(evenNumbers); // [2, 4]
```

## With Streams (Cleaner):

```
List<Integer> numbers = List.of(1, 2, 3, 4, 5);

List<Integer> evenNumbers = numbers.stream().filter(n -> n % 2 == 0).toList();

System.out.println(evenNumbers); // [2, 4]
```


